Welcome to
Debugging Small Programs, our very final lecture
or at least almost! We are going to, in this lecture, finish
off the game, polish off some bugs that we have found and introduced during
the course of writing this game, and we are going to be figuring out
how to play test, how to show it to people, and get feedback,
as well as introducing a concept, a very enigmatic concept,
called Rubber Duck Debugging and how this can help us to debug our own code. So let's dive right in!
So our code is starting to take shape, our game is
starting to take shape but there is a problem, and
that problem is, well let's play and have a look! This is
the idea, you have to play test, and sometimes you won't be able to find the solution
yourself. Well I'm sorry, you won't be able to find problems yourself, in the game. Like you won't
be able to find out whether it's fun or not. So what we really want to do is
give this to somebody who hasn't seen the game before. Give it to your daughter,
give it to your wife, give it to somebody who hasn't played but likes
playing these sorts of games, and just go on through and see if
they encounter any problems that you haven't foreseen. So
you might find out that the game's not fun, that is one thing you might find,
and the whole premise needs scrapping or you might find a bug, such as this one. So
I've got home now, but if I keep moving I can go
away from home, and it basically doesn't end the game or get any
satisfaction of having finished. And also, you'll notice
that the whole time I'm getting two sets of
distances printed out. So what is going on here? Why would I get
two distances printed out, why would I be able to carry on? Well let's
answer the first one. The two distances being printed out, well that's clearly not
ours here, we are only printing distances once, and why they're different, that
doesn't make any sense. It seems that there are two scripts somewhere, and
indeed, I think we have one lying around from before? Yep, on the Directional
Light, we have a go home game script lying around, which shouldn't be there.
So we'll Remove that Component. And also the ConsolePrinter Game Object,
that's no longer the right thing, it's no longer the right name, it's
more the Go Home Game Object, like
so. Hit Enter to set it,
and now, if we play... Oops, there you go! That's probably
how it happened. I probably deleted the component, while playing, and then started
playing and the component came back. So let's just repeat those steps!
Remove the Component and rename this one,
hit Enter, and
test it out before saving. So now,
we've only got one set of log messages, and as I move
around, I'm getting the distance printed out. So let's
try and find our way home, as quickly as we know how,
and that's increasing, so we probably
need to go in this direction. Oops, not quite.
We're getting there. Yes, home!
But we still have this problem, though we can still carry on playing. Now, it may not
be immediately obvious to you why this is happening, it may be immediately obvious to you
why this is happening, but I want to show you a technique which will make it obvious
to you, no matter what, and this is called Rubber Duck Debugging.
What on Earth is Rubber Duck Debugging and why is it called this?
So the story goes that programmers often carry around
a little rubber duck. Now the reason for this is because you often want
to get a eureka moment, by describing things people.
You'll find that you go to your colleague and you start describing what your program
is, what it does, and the bug that you're having, and you'll go, ah hah
I know what's wrong with it! And that's even before your colleague has opened his mouth
to say anything. So really, it is the act of explaining things to people
and teaching things to people, even if they understand nothing about the subject,
that allows us to get a different perspective and to
go, ahh now I get what is going wrong with this! So it's a really good technique
for you to use! If you ever get stuck during this course, just imagine
you're speaking to a rubber duck. Say it out loud, if you really want to. Say it to
your wife or someone who doesn't understand anything about programming
or your husband or your children, and just
bore them with an explanation of what's going wrong and you'll often find
that it actually helps you fix it. So the basic outline is, explain your
problem out loud, walk through the code explaining each line and what you
expect it to do, and the sensei will be enigmatic. So if you're using a rubber
duck, I'm sure that you'll have a very enigmatic sensei here, who just
basically just sits there and gives you a hard look and doesn't really say
very much but you will definitely have an ah hah moment! If you don't,
then you may have to resort to slightly more in depth ways of debugging, but
for a start, this can be really quite effective and is the way
renowned scientists like Einstein say that they came up with
some big theories, so it should probably work for
you, too. So I'd like you to give this a go, to explain the bug to your
sensei. You can use our forums as a sensei, if you like.
Just go in there and type up a post, that explains line by line what you expect
your code to be doing, and see if you can find
any inconsistencies with that. So, run through the code, pretend to be the
computer. If you like, you can try and do each line, as if you were the
computer following the execution flow and having a look,
and then, explain what you would expect it to do and where does it go wrong.
That is the crucial thing we want to find. And do you have any ideas on how to
fix it? So pause and have a go at this style of debugging!
Hey, so welcome back!
We are going to try out the start of debugging! So what
happens? What is happening just before something goes wrong here?
So we've played around, we've got a certain
distance, which is very close to home in the playerLocation, and we've got some
home location, in homeLocation. We go into the
Update () loop. Say this is a frame in which there is some
movement, so we go into the UpArrow, we execute
that, we go down into this, the UpArrow
is down, so we execute this, and say this
is the last move, before we end up home, so this
movementVector moves us into a location, the playerLocation, which is the same
as home. Then, we PrintDistanceToHome(), it'll calculate
this, that'll give us a 0 vector so that magnitude
of 0 vector is 0, and it'll say distance to home is 0, and it'll say
they are ==, so find home. O.K.,So that was the move
before. Now, what if in the next frame I
hold down the Up Arrow or the Left Arrow again? So I go into
here, I execute the if statement again, I
update the playerLocation, instantly, then I
print the distance from home. Well I still calculate that distance from home.
So something is definitely wrong here in that we
can still UpdateMovement, when
the words, I'm home, have been
printed. So what we want to do is prevent that. Once there words have
been printed, no more checks are done. So we know that we could
stop there checks from being done, with conditional execution. So we could say if
something, then we can cut and paste this
into here. And then, what is going to go into this if
statement? Well one thing that we can do is store a boolean variable.
For example, we could say that the game is over; at the end here, we can say
that is true. So what I want to do is declare a new boolean variable.
I don't need it to be public, so it could just be bool
game
IsOver, to describe very well what it does.
And right here, we can actually give it a value if we want to, a default value of the
game over being false. That's what we want,
lower case and a semicolon at the end.
So what we want to say is, if the game is
not over. So how do we do that? Well in actual fact
we've seen one way you might think of doing it is gameIsOver not equal
to true? So that is one way of doing it
and that would be fine! And in
here, after the print go home, we can say that game
IsOver is = to true. So now, from here
on, once we have printed out this statement,
when we go into an update loop it won't execute anything, because it
will be = to true. Now I can
abbreviate this. I was just going to say that if you want to say
true, you can just leave it like that, so if we wanted to execute this only when
the game is over, we could put it like this, but what we want to do is say the opposite of this, when
this is not the case. Now to say not in C#, you use
the exclamation mark. When we say not (!gameIsOver), like that, that's how we
read it. Exclamation mark reads as not, simple as that, and that's just an
abbreviation for what I wrote previously. So let's
play now and see whether we have fixed the issue!
I'm going to move with the aid of the
location, over in the Inspector. It's cheating a little bit but just to make it a little bit quicker.
So now, I'm home, and you'll notice that from the sound
I'm hitting the keys and nothing is happening. So we have fixed that
bug, the game is over, the last message is printed, and
no longer can we update the location, so bug fixed! We have
a fully functioning game! I would like to see the results of you play testing
it with other people you know and seeing what improvements you can make
to this game, to make it even more fun, more enjoyable, and do share those in
the forums in the discussions! So see you in the next section!